Dump1090 README
===

Dump 1090 is a Mode S decoder specifically designed for RTLSDR devices.

The main features are:

* Robust decoding of weak messages.
* Single bit errors correction using the 24 bit CRC.
* Ability to decode DF11, DF17 messages.
* Ability to decode DF formats like DF0, DF4, DF5, DF16, DF20 and DF21
  where the checksum is xored with the ICAO address by brute forcing the
  checksum field using recently seen ICAO addresses.
* Decode raw IQ samples from file (using --ifile command line switch).
* Interactive mode where aircrafts currently detected are shown
  as a list refreshing as more data arrives.

Installation
---

Type "make".

Normal usage
---

To capture traffic directly from your RTL device and show the captured traffic
on standard output, just run the program without options at all:

    ./dump1090

To just output hexadecimal messages:

    ./dump1090 --raw

To run the program in interactive mode:

    ./dump1090 --interactive

In iteractive mode it is possible to have a less information dense but more
"arcade style" output, where the screen is refreshed every second displaying
all the recently seen aircrafts with some additional information such as
altitude and flight number, extracted from the received Mode S packets.

Using files as source of data
---

To decode data from file, use:

    ./dump1090 --ifile /path/to/binfile

The binary file should be created using rtl_sdr like this (or with any other
program that is able to output 8-bit unsigned IQ samples at 2Mhz sample rate).

    rtl_sdr -f 1090000000 -s 2000000 -g 50 output.bin

In the example rtl_sdr a gain of 50 is used, simply you should use the highest
gain availabe for your tuner. This is not needed when calling Dump1090 itself
as it is able to select the highest gain supported automatically.

It is possible to feed the program with data via standard input using
the --ifile option with "-" as argument.

Additional options
---

Dump1090 can be called with other command line options to set a different
gain, frequency, and so forth. For a list of options use:

    ./dump1090 --help

Everything is not documented here should be obvious, and for most users calling
it without arguments at all is the best thing to do.

Reliability
---

By default Dump1090 tries to fix single bit errors using the checksum.
Basically the program will try to flip every bit of the message and check if
the checksum of the resulting message matches.

This is indeed able to fix errors and works reliably in my experience,
however if you are interested in very reliable data I suggest to use
the --no-fix command line switch in order to disable error fixing.

Performances and sensibility of detection
---

In my limited experience Dump1090 was able to decode a big number of messages
even in conditions where I encountered problems using other programs, however
no formal test was performed so I can't really claim that this program is
better or worse compared to other similar programs.

If you can capture traffic that Dump1090 is not able to decode properly, drop
me an email with a download link. I may try to improve the detection during
my free time (this is just an hobby project).

Antenna
---

Mode S messages are transmitted in the 1090 Mhz frequency. If you have a decent
antenna you'll be able to pick up signals from aircrafts pretty far from your
position, especially if you are outdoor and in a position with a good sky view.

You can easily build a very cheap antenna following the istructions at:

    http://antirez.com/news/46

With this trivial antenna I was able to pick up signals of aircrafts 200+ Km
away from me.

Debug mode
---

The Debug mode is a visual help to improve the detection algorithm or to
understand why the program is not working for a given input.

In this mode messages are displayed in an ASCII-art style graphical
representation, where the individial magnitude bars sampled at 2Mhz are
displayed.

An index shows the sample number, where 0 is the sample where the first
Mode S peak was found. Some additional background noise is also added
before the first peak to provide some context.

It is possible to display different categories of messages:

    --debug 1       Displays all the messages correctly demoudulated.
                    A correctly demodulated message is just one that
                    makes sense as a Mode S message, the preamble makes
                    sense, and there are no message errors, that is,
                    no adiacet samples describing bits are the same
                    magnitude.

    --debug 2       Only messages with demodulation errors are displayed,
                    That is, only messages where one or more adiacent
                    samples that should describe bits are the same
                    magnitude.

    --debug 3       Correctly deooded messages with Bad CRC are displayed.

    --debug 4       Correctly deooded messages with good CRC are displayed.

    --debug 5       Preamble detection failed in some way (specified when
                    dumping the samples) even if the current sample level
                    is greater than MODES_DEBUG_NOPREAMBLE_LEVEL (set to
                    25 by default).

How this program works?
---

The code is very documented and written in order to be easy to understand.
For the diligent programmer with a Mode S specification on his hands it
should be trivial to understand how it works.

The algorithms I used were obtained basically looking at many messages
as displayed using a trow-away SDL program, and trying to model the algorithm
based on how the messages look graphically.

How to test the program?
---

If you have an RTLSDR device and you happen to be in an area where there
are aircrafts flying over your head, just run the program and check for signals.

However if you don't have an RTLSDR device, or if in your area the presence
of aircrafts is very limited, you may want to try the sample file distributed
with the Dump1090 distribution under the "testfiles" directory.

Just run it like this:

    ./dump1090 --ifile testfiles/modes1.bin

What is --strip mode?
---

It is just a simple filter that will get raw IQ 8 bit samples in input
and will output a file missing all the parts of the file where I and Q
are lower than the specified <level> for more than 32 samples.

Use it like this:

    cat big.bin | ./mode1090 --snip 25 > small.bin

I used it in order to create a small test file to include inside this
program source code distribution.

Contributing
---

Mode1090 was written during some free time during xmas 2012, it is an hobby
project so I'll be able to address issues and improve it only during
free time, however you are incouraged to send pull requests in order to
improve the program. A good starting point can be the TODO list included in
the source distribution.

Credits
---

Dump1090 was written by Salvatore Sanfilippo <antirez@gmail.com> and is
released under the BSD three clause license.
